(lawnmowers buzzing)
Training Officer:
Mm-hmm.
I came to the police academy
just like you,
um, but I was able to,
to get yelled at
right in my face.
So if you think
you can handle it
to be here, just don't quit.
(recruits clapping)
Eugenia Charles-Newton:
Every time I hear
that another recruit
has left the academy, it's like
my heart sinks, you know?
And it's just one less officer
that's gonna graduate
that's gonna be put out
into the community.
Sgt. Rob Williams:
What's going on?
Recruit 1 (straining):
I can't catch a full breath.
Sgt. Williams:
I need a 55 to the academy.
I've got a recruit,
shortness of breath.
Hey, Carlton, it's Rob.
Well, we have
one of your recruits
wanting to punch out.
Um, no, I'm not kidding you.
Lt. Donnie Kee:
If there's any more
quitters in this group,
just raise your hand
right now and go.
I need to dedicate my time
and my effort to those people
that want to be here.
Work, let's go, do the work!
Eugenia: Lieutenant Kee
is feeling a lot of pressure
because he is expected
to graduate 500 officers
in the next five years.
That's the weight
that we're putting on him.
Sgt. Lucy Dan: You have
one classmate that quit.
Now wave.
You guys, look at him and wave!
-Training Officer: Say goodbye.
-Class: Goodbye.
Sgt. Williams: So another one
bites the dust, 57.
You may have your reasons
for quitting.
I want you
to look deep inside.
Is this really a valid reason,
or is this just my excuse
because I don't want
to put in the effort?
Sgt. Dan: Um,
they're leaving left and right,
and that's kind of
got me worried.
The atmosphere is different,
I guess.
Sgt. Williams:
Especially if it's somebody
that everybody got along with.
If they have to be terminated
or they DOR,
drop on request, they leave.
You can see it,
it has an effect on morale.
Self-doubt.
I really think it is self-doubt
that is creeping
into minds over here.
You guys can do this.
You can do this.
We want you to do this.
-Right?
-Class: Sir, yes, sir.
Sgt. Williams: So real loud,
I want to hear, "I can do this."
-One, two, three.
-Class: I can do this!
Sgt. Williams:
Do it again. One, two, three.
Class:
I can do this!
-Sgt. Williams: One, two, three.
-Class: I can do this!
Sgt. Williams:
No more quitters, we ain't
got time for that, do we?
Class:
Sir, no, sir!
(flag fluttering)
Recruit 2:
Yeah, his is all soft, huh?
Recruit 3: Yeah.
Feels like a cushion...
(overlapping chatter, laughter)
Feels like a cushion
or something.
(indistinct chatter)
Shawvan Levi: Um, Hardy,
Hardy has something to say.
Centurion Hardy:
I just want to say that
if it wasn't for
the friendships I made,
I probably wouldn't have
came back this weekend.
So I'm committed
to you guys already,
and the only way
I'm going out, bro,
is if I fail a class, bro.
-I'm not quitting.
-Recruit 4: I love that.
Hardy: And all I got is y'all,
like, in this situation.
-Recruit 5: Aww...
-Recruit 6: Yes, sir.
Hardy:
So when I look over to my right,
I want to see him putting in
the same effort as me.
If he's not, I'll motivate him,
and I'm look like
I'm going down.
I'ma just need
some motivation from you all.
-You know what I'm saying?
-Recruit 7: Yes, sir.
-Recruit 8: Yes, sir.
-Hardy: Yeah.
That's all I want to say.
(recruits shouting)
Shawvan:
Breathing.
(recruits grunting)
Training Officer:
Keep going.
Antwan Gray:
Takes a lot just to be here.
So, yeah, I would--
i-it's really hard.
(laughs)
I feel like really stressed,
especially when
somebody outs, DORs.
Sgt. Williams: Damn, Hardy.
You jumped when I said fight.
Antwan:
But my motivation right now
is Recruit Hardy.
(recruits shouting)
-(whistle blows)
-Sgt. Williams: End it. End it.
(applause)
Sgt. Williams:
That, ladies and gentlemen,
is a fine specimen
of diné warriorship
right here.
Goddamn.
Antwan:
Hardy's cool to hang out with,
you know,
where he jokes around.
And the main thing
is every workout,
Hardy's number one here.
But I want to be better
than him
because that's motivation
right there.
When I first saw him, I was
like, "I want to fight you."
He's like,
"Why do you want to fight me?"
I said, "I just want
to know how it feels
to get my butt kicked."
(laughs)
Sgt. Dan:
Rotate one.
Antwan:
That's what I need because
I wanna be like him.
I want to be a beast.
I want to go out there
and never be afraid.
(Antwan sighs)
-Now put that down.
-(kids chattering)
Andrea Gray:
We did not always have
electricity and running water,
and our treat was gas,
(chuckles)
because we used to run
the house on generator.
Now we have running water
and electricity.
The only thing we still do
is haul wood.
Kid:
Dad.
Andrea: I think it was about
a year and a half ago.
He's just like, "I want
to be a police officer."
And I was like,
"Okay, that's fine."
But my sister,
her husband's a police officer,
and she always tells me,
"It's-it's gonna be hard.
It's gonna be hard.
It's not easy."
I was just like, "Okay."
Antwan: Well, I knew some cops
when I was a kid,
and I thought they were cool.
(chuckles)
Like, I always looked at them
like they're brave.
Kid:
Dada.
Antwan:
When I was growing up,
I just remember
there's a lot of fears.
I've always been feared
of heights.
of stuff, like things in life.
And see my dad the way
he used to be back then,
he used to sell drugs.
(indistinct chatter)
I used to see people
come around the house
that I never knew
who they were,
and they would
dress up gangster-ish,
some meth people
coming around the house
and my dad used
to just smoke outside,
and he used to drink.
So my mom
and dad always fought.
Go put her on the table.
One time I came downstairs,
and my mom tried
to cover up her,
like, her hit marks,
because my dad used
to hit her a lot,
and I was always just afraid.
To this day,
I still think of that time.
Even at the academy,
like, Lieutenant Kee,
he was saying
that I just want you guys
to have the mindset of a lion,
and they fight,
they never give up.
Andrea:
Where's Simba, where's Simba?
Antwan:
I want to be that person,
because I know
I could help people out there,
but I know that fear is just
gonna push me back,
and... if I have fear,
just like they said,
if you have fear,
it's gonna get you killed.
(running footsteps)
Sgt. Williams:
Front leading rest, move!
Yesterday, I saw two recruits
coming out of a hotel
wearing their duty belts.
So who was that yesterday
in that blue Chevy?
Who was that?
Damon Cattleman:
Sir, it was me, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
Cattleman.
Who else?
There was two of you.
-Who was with you, Cattleman?
-Recruit 9: Sir, it was me, sir.
What took you so long
to answer me?
Recruit 9:
Cattleman had a gray truck, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
Fair enough.
Out in public, you are not
to have any outward indications
in that you are training
to be a police officer.
Did we not cover that?
Class:
Sir, yes, sir.
Sgt. Williams: We have
these rules for a reason.
What's happening out there
to our brothers and sisters,
they are being attacked,
unprovoked, ambushed.
That should send a little bit
of a shiver down your spine.
We have to learn
these lessons now.
Class:
Sir, yes, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
Sometimes they're painful.
There is no police academy
anywhere in this country
where it isn't a matter
of life and death.
Let's get them into class.
You know, they're recruits.
They're human.
You know,
they're gonna be afraid.
You can't always call for backup
just 'cause you're scared.
You don't get to be scared.
That's why our commitment
to learning our craft
and being professional saves
our lives out here, alright?
All the lessons we teach,
they're blood lessons.
An officer probably died for us
to learn these things.
Lt. Kee:
Let me see your fingernails.
Sgt. Williams:
If you show up to this job
looking like six foot of shit,
they are gonna
size you up quick,
and then they are gonna
beat you.
We have had
Navajo police officers
beaten to death.
You may go to
a simple trespassing,
and it breaks down
into a fight.
Get back.
Get back, get back.
Back, back, back,
back, back.
Sgt. Williams: And now you have
a one-on-one situation,
so I'm kind of
the mean disciplinarian figure
for a reason.
End it. End it.
If you ever take it easy
on one of your brothers
or sisters again,
I want you to realize you may
be responsible for their death.
-Fight!
-(fighters grunting)
Lt. Kee: It's a necessary part
of their indoctrination
into a lifestyle...
(recruits shouting)
Lt. Kee: ...to be able to act
violently when necessary.
Sgt. Williams:
Both hands on that gun hand.
(whistle blows)
Lt. Kee:
I love the double time.
It's constant testing...
Do it all the time.
...training in
the Marine Corps,
and it was,
it was punishment.
You, on your feet.
Lt. Kee:
They just punished
you nonstop.
-Where's your belly?
-Recruit 10: Right here, sir.
Pet your belly,
rub your head.
Lt. Kee:
But at the same time,
it's allowed me
to subject myself
to things that normal people
probably wouldn't.
-Grant Keams: Alright, ready.
-Hardy: Navajo Police!
Get down on the ground!
Navajo Police!
Switch!
Cheyenne Pettigrew:
Navajo Police!
Get down on the ground.
Show me your hands.
Lt. Kee:
I have a lot of responsibility
to prepare them
for really what they're gonna
be out there facing.
It would be a terrible thing
to send somebody out there
who isn't prepared.
(indistinct chatter)
Training Officer:
So your property sheet,
it says brand block,
right next to it is
the serial number.
That is gonna be
for your gun.
When you pass academy,
this firearm will go
with you everywhere.
So you might as well remember
that serial number.
Go ahead
and remove the magazine.
Lock the slide back.
Confirm that
it's an empty firearm.
Sgt. Williams:
What are you doing there?
Watch your muzzle.
-Training Officer:
...by the trigger...
-Shawvan: Yes, sir.
Training Officer:
...that is your serial number.
Should be the same one
if you look at your box.
(gun clicking)
(indistinct chatter)
Sgt. Williams:
Real quick, eyes up.
For those of you
who are having trouble,
you're gonna reach over,
grab the nice little
serrations block
put there for you,
pull back hard,
push up with your thumb.
That will lock your slide
to the rear.
Don't be afraid of it.
It's just another tool.
It's not going to hurt you
unless you do something
stupid with it, right?
-Class: Yes, sir.
-Sgt. Williams: Okay.
You guys will learn a lot.
Don't be worried about
what you don't know yet.
We're gonna
train you to shoot.
Anything else?
Okay.
(patrons chattering)
Shawvan:
Hey, mom.
Shawvan: Happy you could
join us for lunch.
I know it's like me
and my son.
We don't really talk.
-Just kidding.
-(laughter)
Shawvan:
Oh. I just told Steph last week
they gave us
our duty weapons already.
Shawmarie Bainbridge:
What about the shooting part?
You feel confident about it?
Shawvan:
Yeah.
Shawmarie: I'm worried
about you, and I'm like,
oh, what made you want
to do this anyways?
Remember you wanted
to be a pop star,
a rapper,
a dancer?
(Shawvan speaking)
I don't know.
Honestly, I think one thing
that made me want to do it,
my dad's side of the family.
My last name here
on the reservation
is pretty well known.
Stephanie Sanisya:
In a not-so-good way.
Shawvan: Yeah. Like,
remember I was helping out
transport people
that are going to jail?
There's a couple of guys
where they read my badge
and they're like,
"Levi? Are you with the Levis?"
And I just stand there,
I'm like,
"Well, I mean,
my last name's Levi."
They're like, "Oh, okay."
And then they just
start looking away.
My dad's side of the family,
it has a bad reputation.
Like, my uncles,
they've been to prison,
and they've recently come out.
I've actually had contact
with one of them.
I had to transport my uncle,
and he was upset
about the whole thing
and calling out threats
and stuff,
but I was wearing a mask
so he didn't recognize me
or anything.
Yeah.
Stephanie:
Be careful. Come this way.
Wow, look.
Shawvan: I am kind of worried
about my dad's side
finding out what my job is
because they-they hate cops
no matter what.
Shawvan's son:
Look, look, look, look.
(Stephanie and Shawvan gasp)
-Shawvan: Oh, shoot.
-Stephanie: Oh, yeah.
Shawvan:
There's, er, some new art.
(laughter)
Just kind of seeing
how they were growing up
and how they still are,
I want to do
something different.
Something to be there
to actually help
and signify
that I'm not associated
with the Levis' bad name.
(Dispatcher 1 over radio)
Sgt. Eldon Foster:
I have an unresponsive.
Alright.
Dispatcher 2: I don't know
who called it in...
Sgt. Foster:
Alright, bye.
Alcohol is illegal
in the reservation
according to Navajo Nation law,
but we still have our people
that suffer from,
you know, alcohol addiction.
Speaker 1:
I barely woke up, so...
Sgt. Foster:
Were you guys drinking?
Speaker 1:
In the morning, we was.
Sgt. Foster: Alright. Just wait
on the side of the house, man.
-Yep.
-Speaker 1: Oh, fuck.
Sgt. Foster: They're drinking
early this morning
and looks like he threw up
and choked
probably when he was
passed out.
So right now, he's unresponsive.
I-- he's-he's gone.
There's, like,
no pulse, nothing.
Yeah.
Speaker 2: What the fuck
did you guys fucking do to him?
Sgt. Foster:
Hey, calm down. calm down.
-Speaker 1: I didn't do nothing.
-Sgt. Foster: Calm down.
Speaker 1:
Your cousin dropped him off.
Speaker 2: You're the reason
why he's fucking dead.
I'm like, fuck,
I don't want to get arrested
for nothing I didn't do.
It gets me sad when I'm in here
because I have a clean record.
I barely turned 18. I don't--
I don't want to
go back to jail, yo.
(siren wailing)
Eugenia: It's hard to live here
on the Navajo Nation.
There's nothing to do here.
And as a result of that,
our Navajo people suffer.
They suffer because the services
that are promised to them
are not delivered.
We do have a 638 contract
right now.
It's a contract that's between
the United States
of America and tribes.
1868 with the Navajo Treaty,
that's how long
we've been under
the federal government's hands
you know.
We are the, um,
the stepchild
to the federal government.
I use this analogy,
how many of you guys
have watched the movie "Friday"?
The older people
don't want to admit it.
(laughter)
Eugenia:
Do you remember the mom
gives that dollar bill
to Smokey
and she says, "Go buy me
a pack of cigarettes."
And he looks at that dollar and
he says, "This isn't enough."
And she says,
"Well, go make it enough."
That's BIA telling
the Navajo Nation,
"Go make it enough."
When people are driving
through the Navajo Nation
and they see the way
that we live,
they, you know, probably think,
you know,
"Just make the choice
to get out of it."
It's not that easy.
We don't own the land.
We lease the land
from the federal government.
I cannot go to the bank
for a loan to build my home.
The only thing that people
can credit are mobile homes.
And we can't just have Walmart
come on to build here.
It takes six months
to six years to get processed.
And businesses, you know,
th-they lose interest.
The laws work against us.
We can't just pick ourselves up
by the bootstrap
and say we're gonna
change our life.
(recruits chattering, laughing)
Recruit 11:
Oh.
(indistinct chatter)
Recruit 11:
Go, Levi. Go, Levi.
(indistinct chatter, laughter)
(cheering)
Training Officer:
You still have the keys?
Lt. Kee:
Okay. Line up by size now.
Allen, Largo, first two.
-(whistle blows)
-Come on, Allen.
(grunts)
Recruit 12:
Come on, Allen.
(recruits shouting)
-Recruit 11: Come on, Allen!
-Lt. Kee: Keep fighting, Allen!
Recruit 11:
Come on, Allen.
Nora Allen: I never backed down
from fighting a male.
Growing up, I tried playing
with my cousin's sisters,
but they were always running
to my mom,
"Oh, Nora's making me cry.
She's too rough."
(recruits shouting)
Lt. Kee:
Get both hands on that arm!
Nora: Growing up, my mom was
a probation officer.
I would sneak into her bag
and open her books
and just start looking at 'em.
It was in those moments
that I knew I wanted
to become a police officer.
-Sgt. Williams: Tuck in.
-Lt. Kee: Roll him over!
There you go!
-There you go!
-Recruit 13: Come on!
(whistle blows)
Sgt. Williams:
Hey, nice.
Lt. Kee:
Good job.
Nora:
But I kind of put it off
because in a sense
I felt like I wasn't ready.
You know, just growing up
on the reservation,
I went through a lot.
A lot, lot.
(metal clanking)
(creaking)
(cow huffing)
And he said
not to go in there, right?
Charles Allen:
You can.
Just watch out for that ram.
(Nora laughs)
Charles: Ever since we've been
together, we've been a team.
See, as you cut it.
Oh.
(Charles chuckles)
Really, I'm scared for her.
It's just all the dangers
involved being a police officer,
but here to support her
however I can,
whatever she needs.
We've been through
so much together
and still continue
to build together.
I'm very grateful because
my ex-husband was terrible.
Mental abuse, physical abuse,
and he was not supportive
of my decision
to become an officer.
He would sit there and say,
"You're just broke.
You're just dumb.
"You're just stupid.
You're never gonna be a cop."
And so I guess
I doubted myself a lot.
Charles:
She don't see it,
but she has a fire in her,
so I know
she can handle herself.
Whether she sees it or not.
(pensive music playing)
(wind gusting)
(tarps fluttering)
(rumbling)
Training Officer:
Oh!
Keams:
Fuck yeah.
If anybody have
any issues loading?
(grunts)
Sgt. Williams:
Seriously?
(both laugh)
Sgt. Williams: Okay, so you're
acting like a bunch
of horny teenagers
on prom night,
so we're just gonna get it
out of your system, alright?
What we're gonna do is
we're gonna do a mag dump.
We're gonna pull that trigger
as fast as you can.
Okay.
Hey. Fire.
(gunfire)
Keep pulling. Keep pulling.
Just pull it.
Sgt. Williams:
Just pull the trigger.
(indistinct) in the holster.
Sgt. Gary Franklin: Alright,
Allen, I know you get mental,
alright?
I know it already.
So what we're gonna do is
we're gonna try
to get you confident, okay?
Go and get
some face targets up.
Sgt. Williams:
Good.
Alright, here we go.
(buzzer blares)
(gunfire)
Sgt. Williams: Okay.
You understand the importance
of not missing, right?
-Recruit: Yes, sir.
-Sgt. Williams: Somebody
could be back there.
If you get it in the snow,
you owe me 10,
because if it lands
in the snow,
that represents
somebody's grandma,
the nicest old fucking grandma
in the community
who made everybody
fresh fry bread every morning,
always had a pot
of coffee on for you,
and you fuckin' shot her.
Little pressure?
There's consequences
to our actions.
Get serious.
Okay, two standing,
three kneeling.
(buzzer blares)
Training Officer:
Take your time.
Shawvan:
Before the last class,
I never really shot a gun...
(gunshot)
...and it can
be stressful, so...
Sgt. Williams:
What we got here.
Are you gonna explain that
to her parents?
Shawvan:
Yes, sir.
What scares me
is making a mistake.
Sgt. Williams:
You lined the sight,
you pressed the trigger.
Are you gonna go
to court and say,
"Well, your honor,
I was startled."
You're still going
to fucking prison, right?
(whistle blows)
Stephanie:
Shawvan's very empathetic.
(gunfire)
He wants to do
the right thing,
but he overthinks a lot,
and I think that's one thing
I talk to him about
while he's at the academy,
'cause he can overthink
to the point
where he makes himself
physically sick.
The thing I noticed about the
two of them is they're mental.
They're just mental cases.
He's flat out, like, shaking.
He's on that trigger,
and he's stressing so much
that you can see
the little twitch.
Sgt. Williams: Don't confuse
yourself on this stuff.
This is a shootable target.
I already told you.
This is a deadly threat.
All you got
to do is shoot it.
(recruits chattering)
Karletta Tso-Tapahanso:
So this is what we're gonna do.
Don't be hit at C, right?
In that area.
You wait until she gets
to A or B, right?
That's all you're gonna do.
Sgt. Dan:
Pettigrew, where are your hands?
(staff whooshing)
(staff thuds)
Cheyenne:
Ma'am, no, ma'am.
(staff whooshing)
Sgt. Dan:
Time it, time it.
Tso-Tapahanso:
Come on this side.
Okay. Pettigrew did
a pretty good job.
Yeah, you guys can sit back
and judge her
because she hit her arm,
hit her wrist,
but she still managed
to do something
very few of you guys
wanted to do.
(wind rustling)
Cheyenne: I just used
a little bit of Dawn dish soap
and got it clean.
Karen Johnson:
Yeah.
Cheyenne:
But we still have, like,
the gun stuff.
Then I know we have, like,
80 hours of defensive tactics,
so I'll keep coming home
with big bruises.
-(Cheyenne laughs)
-Oh, my goodness.
When she comes back
on the weekend,
she lets us know
what's going on.
The other day she says, "Mom,
I have something to tell you."
And I was gonna tell her,
"Just don't tell me
you dropped out
of the academy."
(laughs)
And she's like, "No.
"When I finish,
I want to come back
"and teach
at the academy too,
to help get more recruits."
I'm really proud of her.
You know, I have two boys
and one girl,
and my only girl decides to go
to the police academy,
and I think everybody
was kind of surprised.
I'm not sure why
everyone was surprised.
(laughs)
They probably just thought
it was comfortable
with being a dispatcher
and they were happy with me
just sitting
in the police department
in a safe area.
(chuckles)
But, um...
Karen: Well, to become
a police officer,
it is dangerous.
And I did think about that.
I don't know.
I'm-I'm hoping
that she can be able
to handle it physically,
when-- if there's ever
an incident,
because she's my only daughter
and we believe in prayer.
We believe in prayer
and putting it in God's hands.
Sgt. Williams: Alright.
Questions, comments, concerns?
-Class: Sir, no, sir.
-Sgt. Williams: Okay.
Don't necessarily
hyperfocus like,
"Oh, shit,
what am I gonna do?"
You know, when you start getting
that tunnel vision,
because you didn't practice
your combat breathing,
so now you're scared,
and you're giving into fear,
and your body's taking over,
and you can't stop it.
Julius is gonna be
all paranoid now.
He's gonna get down
behind Haskin.
He's gonna hold her up.
(class laughing)
Tso-Tapahanso:
From the time you get maced,
all positive thoughts.
You start thinking negative,
it's gonna go downhill
really fast.
Good?
Oh, man,
this is gonna suck.
Recruit 14:
Go, Levi. Go, Levi.
-(spray hisses)
-Ah, sh--
-Training Officer:
Fuck you, Levi!
-Recruit 14: Let's go, Levi.
Training Officer:
Fucking piece of shit.
Shawvan:
Suspect's running west on foot.
-Training Officer: 10-4.
-Recruit 14: Come on, Levi!
Drop it! Turn around!
Get on your knees!
Keep your arms straight out!
Stay right there. Don't move.
Sgt. Dan:
Good.
Training Officer 1: Make sure
you're reassuring yourself.
Find that you're okay.
Calm down, take deep breaths.
Training Officer 2:
Sergeant, water.
(coughing)
Training Officer 2:
Wash it up.
Tso-Tapahanso:
Get ready. Next one.
Recruit 15:
Let's go, Gray.
(spray hissing)
Training Officer:
Come on, officer. Let's go.
Antwan:
Put the bat down!
Put the blue bat down.
(bat clanging)
Open your eyes.
Do not move!
Training Officer:
You need to wash your face.
Use your hands.
Okay.
Move your hands.
Stretch your hands.
Don't touch your eyeball.
(Antwan grunts)
Training Officer:
Good.
Okay, no more water, guys.
(Antwan groans)
Training Officer:
Ready!
Tso-Tapahanso:
Positive mindset.
-Recruit 15: Go, Billy.
-Recruit 16: Go, Billy.
(spray hisses)
-Recruit 15: Come on, Billy.
-Sgt. Dan: Let's go,
you little bitch!
(Billy grunting)
Recruit 15:
Go, Billy. Go, Billy.
Sgt. Dan: Come On, Billy,
open your eyes!
Come on, Billy,
get your head up!
Look where you're going.
(Billy panting)
Sgt. Dan: Get your--
look at your suspect!
(coughing)
Looks like he's panicking
a little bit.
Sgt. Dan:
Breathe. Breathe.
Lt. Kee:
A little bit overwhelming.
Training Officer:
Hey! Come on!
Get your fucking gun out
and get it done.
You're not done yet.
Keep going. You can breathe.
Billy, can you hear me?
Focus on me.
-Billy, focus on me.
-(Billy grunts)
-Calm down.
-Need the 55, guys.
I can't do it.
(Billy groaning)
Tso-Tapahanso
Come on, Pettigrew. Ready?
Recruit 16:
Let's go, Pettigrew. Come on.
Cheyenne:
Drop the bat! Drop it! Drop it!
Training Officer:
Come on.
(panting)
Tso-Tapahanso:
Slow down.
(panting)
Tso-Tapahanso: Switch over.
Positive control.
Training Officer:
Calm yourself.
Cheyenne:
Water. Water.
Okay. Here. Here.
Keep your head sideways.
Okay. Relax.
Relax. Good job.
Sgt. Dan:
Hardy, let's go.
(Hardy groaning)
I can't breathe.
I can't control it.
Breathe. Breathe. Breathe.
-Recruit 15: Let's go, Allen.
-Sgt. Dan: Go.
(Nora coughing)
Sgt. Dan: Come on.
What are you gonna do now?
Recruit: Let's go, Allen.
Come on, fight through it.
(Billy grunting, panting)
Deep breaths.
Tso-Tapahanso:
Calm down.
Sorry, ma'am.
Just because you decided
to get mental and weak.
I have ten others that are
freaking out over there.
-Positive mindset.
-Billy: Sorry, ma'am.
Tso-Tapahanso:
Don't allow yourself to panic.
Fear is not what we're gonna
let get the best of this.
You guys can all do it.
I've seen you go
through more this week.
(grunting)
Shawvan:
You're okay. You're okay.
Control. Control.
Positive thoughts
from here, Hardy.
(groaning)
Lt. Kee:
It's a good day.
Learning is occurring.
You know, in order to
build a team,
your group either has to
accomplish something together
or they suffer together.
Even better if they
accomplished something
while suffering together.
Just don't tense up.
Just keep breathing.
It will get better
from here.
Tso-Tapahanso: Pettigrew,
she panicked a little,
but she managed.
(Tso-Tapahanso speaking Navajo)
Ready? Cheese.
Class:
Cheese.
(camera shutter clicking)
(Tso-Tapahanso speaking)
(Billy speaking)
(solemn music playing)
Sgt. Dan:
Good morning, Lieutenant.
Are you busy?
(Lt. Kee over phone)
Sgt. Dan:
Okay.
Um, Billy is gonna DOR.
Lt. Kee:
Shit.
Mm-hmm.
-Um...
-Lt. Kee: Is he, uh...
Sgt. Dan:
Yeah, pretty much.
Lt. Kee: Is there no
talking him out of it?
Sgt. Dan:
No.
(somber music playing)
Lt. Kee: On command, you're
gonna draw your firearm.
You're gonna assume
a kneeling position.
Allen, put your knee up
like you did before.
That even changes the way
that it feels in your hips.
It creates tension
in your quads.
(guns clicking)
Press it hard.
Press it. Work it.
Nora:
It's tough, you know?
I honestly didn't think
I would make it this far.
Sgt. Williams:
Mm-hmm.
Nora: I've tried
to just tell myself,
keep pushing forward
no matter what.
-Nora: Yes, sir.
-Can you do that?
-(training officer yells)
Nora: I used to have nightmares
about my ex-husband,
what I've gone through
mentally,
emotionally, physically.
Just make sure
you exercise violence with it.
You got to get mad
at this thing.
-Grab it. Just--
-(gun rattling)
'Cause you're-- you know?
Every time.
Nora:
Every time I get frustrated
or something happens,
the self-doubt, you know,
I just feel it like, uh,
someone coming up behind me
ready to grab me.
I just felt like
I can't breathe at all.
(gunshot)
Sgt. Franklin:
I need to take Allen
off to the side.
I-I literally had to start
building her from square one.
With firearms, it's literally
like 95 percent mental, okay?
Give me one good shot.
(gunshot)
It's a little bit low.
Start saying out loud,
"Front sight."
-Nora: Front sight.
-Sgt. Franklin: Keep saying it.
Front sight. Front sight.
(gunshot)
You're dipping.
Keep saying it.
Nora: Front sight.
Front sight. Front sight.
Sgt. Williams:
He didn't show up.
Lt. Kee:
He didn't show up today?
Sgt. Williams:
He didn't come in today.
Lt. Kee:
Okay.
So is he quitting?
(speaking Navajo)
You want to call him
and figure this out?
I'll give him a call.
Alright.
Uh...
are you wanting
to stay in this program?
Okay.
Alright.
So let me talk
to the commander,
and I'll get back with you.
Why did Hardy leave?
I, I don't know.
Only Hardy knows why he left.
Everybody thought
this is the guy
who's gonna
make it through.
He doesn't seem to be
really having any problems.
Because of that, I didn't think
he'd be easily broken.
So the class took that
really hard
'cause, uh, some
of them were like,
"If that guy's dropping out,
what chance do I have?"
Antwan: Yeah, it was
a big shock to everybody
'cause they didn't know
he left.
I thought he was okay.
(kid speaking indistinctly)
I thought he was okay,
but, um...
Andrea:
You can't take those up.
Antwan: So that morning,
I checked the board first,
and I saw his name,
and I was like, what the heck?
-Yeah?
-Antwan: I don't know.
We just all
kind of felt down.
The RTOs said,
"What's wrong with you guys?
You guys are acting some way."
And none of us wanted to talk.
Andrea:
Mm-hmm.
And I was the same way.
I just felt down.
Like, I had
no motivation at all.
And that kind of hurt though,
like, seeing him go,
'cause he had
the ability to do it.
But he just put his head down
and said, no, he's done.
But it was his choice.
-(thunder rumbling)
-(rain pattering)
Sgt. Williams:
Let's go, Largo.
You run like you're
in the fucking Coast Guard.
Let's move.
Sgt. Dan:
Come on, Pettigrew,
pick it up!
Training Officer: Let's go.
ladies. Come on, let's go.
Sgt. Dan: Get in there
and just start right on it.
Sgt. Williams:
Let's go. Don't wait. Move.
Pettigrew, you got
to push yourself.
Sgt. Dan:
Come on, Gray.
Don't look all weak and stuff.
Come on.
(recruits shouting)
Sgt. Dan:
Come on, Roberta.
Come on, keep going,
keep going, keep going.
You got to keep pushing.
(thunder rumbling)
Sgt. Dan:
Come on, Manygoats!
Come on over here
real quick.
You better not fucking show
any of the weakness,
-do you understand?
-Ma'am, yes, ma'am.
Sgt. Dan: Okay, don't show it
in your body.
Don't show it in your movements.
Just fuckin' do it.
Now, get in there.
I'm not gonna tell you again.
Why is staff having to come
in here and motivate you?
Why are you not
motivating each other?
You fucked up.
Everybody else is out there.
Were you eyeballing me,
Pettigrew?
Cheyenne:
Sir, no, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
You better not be.
It's like if I'm not right
on top of you all the time,
you try to get away with stuff
just like a little kid.
Grow up!
This is life and death!
Sgt. Dan:
That's why PT is important.
It's to fuckin' save
your life.
I don't swear all the time,
but when you don't do
what I tell you to do,
I'm gonna be
fuckin' swearing.
So when you're underneath
and you're at the bottom,
you better get
your fuckin' ass up and on top.
Lt. Kee: And so it's been
an interesting week for us.
So we'll start
with the Academy report.
We had, uh, recruits quitting
for different reasons.
One recruit, the guy that was
nervous and stressed out.
And then the recruit
that we had from Window Rock,
he couldn't keep up and he said,
"Yeah, I can't keep up.
This is not gonna
be for me."
Officer 1: Also, I now have
three individuals,
uh, that have submitted
for retirement,
so that's really gonna
hamper us moving into, uh, May.
So please don't kick
any of my recruits out,
I'm going to ask of you.
I'm sort of on edge on that,
and that's what I was
stressing about yesterday
when I heard those numbers.
Um, so please,
let's maintain them.
But the good thing
about it is...
Lt. Kee: I tell
the commanders every week
in the commander's meeting
that we're not trying
to run these kids off.
We've basically done
everything that we can
to try to prepare these kids
for, for what they're gonna
be facing.
And I don't--
I don't know of
any other way to do it.
Um, but everybody
is functioning,
knock on some wood.
-(knocking on console)
-Knock on fake wood.
Mondays typically tends
to be a, uh, a bad news day
for something that occurred
over the weekend.
-(wind gusting)
-(flag fluttering)
Sgt. Williams:
Good morning, Lieutenant.
I wanna, I wanna do
a quick assessment
before we actually talk.
Was your weekend good?
Is your morning good?
Okay. Well,
I'm-I'm about to...
So we're gonna be
releasing Pettigrew.
Back on the 25th,
Sergeant Dan received
a call from a lady
claiming to be
Cheyenne's Pettigrew's mother.
She'd said that her grandfather
was very sick
and that she needed Cheyenne
to come home.
So we, we cut her loose,
you know,
"Go take care of your family."
And then an old boyfriend,
who's also a police officer,
received a receipt from Uber,
showing that
she was dropped off,
I think it's Allegiant Stadium
is what it's called,
the big venue in Las Vegas,
Friday night.
We brought her in, said,
"Look, we got these receipts.
You need to be honest with us.
What happened that day?"
She just told us, "Yeah,
"I had spent $400
on Metallica tickets
some time ago, and I wanted
to see the concert."
So she colluded
with a friend
to make up the story
about her grandfather
so she could go see Metallica.
So, um...
Talked to the chief
of police.
We're gonna attach the facts
outlining the egregious
misconduct to your file.
Now, in this way,
you may be eligible
for other employment
within the Navajo Nation,
just not within NDPS.
-Okay?
-Cheyenne: Yes, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
So, um...
(solemn music playing)
I hope that was
a good concert.
(Sgt. Dan sighs)
(blows nose)
There's nothing really emotional
about losing Pettigrew.
I wouldn't want somebody on,
with the Navajo
Police Department like that.
We live in a glass case.
People are watching
what we do,
what we say.
So we just have
to be careful all the time.
(engine starts)
Sgt. Williams: I really thought
this was the 14
we were gonna graduate.
Now we're down to 13.
Think about what you're doing.
Think about what's important.
Sgt. Foster:
I-it sucks.
I mean, it hurts us
out in the field
because less manpower.
You see a lot of potential
in some of these new options
that go in to the academy,
and, you know,
it kind of makes you wonder
like, "Hey, what happened?
"I mean, is there something
"that we need to change?
"Is there something that needs
to be changed
out there?"
(indistinct radio chatter)
It just, it makes you wonder
a lot of things.
Seeing the rise
of domestic violence,
seeing the rise
in intoxicated people,
it's overwhelming.
(man groans)
Sgt. Foster:
Sir, Navajo Police, wake up.
Are you gonna be okay
the rest of the night?
Ronald Silversmith:
Some of the modern-day
monsters that exist,
you know, alcoholism,
domestic violence, homicides,
those are things
that are uncommon
o-of Navajo way of life.
This is what
our elders talked about,
the foretold stories.
Remember when the twin warriors
slayed the giant monster?
He shouted out, "I'm gonna
take your language away.
I'm gonna take
your culture away."
Well, we were removed
from our homelands
by the federal government.
Our people were told
to forget our way of life.
Our children were put
into boarding schools.
They told us not to speak
our own language.
"We're gonna wash
your mouth with soap."
(indistinct mumbling)
Silversmith:
There's still a lot of trauma
from that experience.
There's still monsters
that move about
between our four
sacred mountains.
So we remind our officers,
you wear the badge,
but that doesn't mean
that you're immune
to a lot of these monsters
that we're fighting.
(Dispatcher over radio)
230, do we have a name
on the 37
that's unconscious
and not responding?
Fuck.
10-4, code two.
(indistinct radio chatter)
That's my, uh...
older brother.
He's just a bad drinker.
(siren wailing)
Sgt. Dan:
Go inside.
Class:
(indistinct) ma'am.
Sgt. Williams:
What's up?
Shawvan:
I wanted to inform you guys
on the uniforms.
Sgt. Williams:
Okay.
Shawvan:
My pants.
I didn't get them hemmed
just yet
because I thought
we were out--
Sgt. Williams: Are you about
to give me an excuse?
Uh, I'm not too sure,
sir, but--
(Sgt. Williams speaking)
I don't know where
your head has been,
but it ain't been here.
You need to get yourself
unfucked pretty quick.
Yes, sir. I was, um,
going to get them hemmed.
Sgt. Williams:
You better get them hemmed.
I don't wanna hear,
"I was gonna."
When are they
gonna be done?
Shawvan: I can get them done
by tonight, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
You want to be here?
Shawvan:
Uh, yes, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
You backing up for?
-Uh...
-Sgt. Williams:
Stay where you're at.
-Yes, sir.
-Sgt. Williams:
You better start acting
like you want to be here.
I don't know what changed
or what happened,
but you're on the fast track,
and now at the very end
you're starting
to crash and burn.
Yes, sir.
(alarm blaring)
Hey! Navajo Police.
(indistinct)
She's the one that did it.
-Stop. Stop. Stop.
-She's the one that did it.
-She has a knife right there.
-Come with me.
-Come with me, sir.
-This is all your fault.
You're gonna jail.
-Shawvan: Come with me.
-Training Officer:
She has a knife!
Turn around. I'm gonna have you
just stay out here, alright?
I'm Shawvan Levi
with Navajo Police.
What's going on?
He's always hitting me
and pushing me around.
So I-I don't want
to live anymore.
I want to kill myself.
(clears throat)
Okay, so right now,
if this is just, this is--
Training Officer:
Aren't you gonna help me?
How are you gonna help me?
Shawvan: Why don't you
lower down the knife,
just lower the knife,
it's just you and--
you and me in here talking.
I'm tired of living.
I'm tired of him hitting me
all the time.
He's not going to be hitting you
right now, okay?
It's just you
and I talking, okay?
Sgt. Dan:
Alright. So domestic violence.
Growing up, how many
of you guys
witnessed anything at all
like o-on domestic violence?
There's quite a few.
And look at this,
it's like 10 times more
than the national average
on Native American reservations.
It is a community problem
which impacts everyone.
Training Officer 1:
Fuck you, bitch.
I'm tired of your shit.
Training Officer 2:
Don't push me.
(both shouting)
Let's just drop the knife.
Let's talk about
this real quick.
Sgt. Dan: Without intervention,
it will repeat itself
and be learned
by the next generation.
-Physical abuse.
-Tso-Tapahanso: Go.
-Sgt. Dan: Pushing.
-Nora: Get back.
Back, back, back.
Antwan:
Get back.
-Sgt. Dan: Kicking.
-Antwan: Get back.
-(fighters grunting)
-Sgt. Dan: Punching.
Sgt. Dan:
Restraining.
Everybody see
the hand placement?
Sgt. Dan:
Using weapons.
(gunfire)
Sgt. Dan: And it's not just
the physical part of it.
Emotional
and psychological abuse...
-(siren wailing)
-(officers yelling)
Sgt. Dan:
...intimidation...
(officers yelling)
Sgt. Dan:
...yelling,
demeaning remarks.
Training Officer:
Let's go, you little bitch.
Sgt. Dan:
Humiliation.
-Where's your belly?
-Recruit: Right here, sir.
Pet your belly.
Rub your head.
Every day, they're told
they're worthless.
They can't do anything right.
Dump them out!
You took too long!
Sgt. Dan:
Children witnessing DV,
seeing it over and over
throughout their,
their childhood,
the emotional trauma,
it affects their brain.
Sgt. Williams: Why are you
so nervous this morning?
Sir, I don't know, sir.
Sgt. Dan:
Common victim
characteristics:
fear.
Why are you
not breathing, Damon?
-Why are you so nervous?
-(exhales forcefully)
Sgt. Dan:
Shame.
Guys, look at him and wave.
Class:
Goodbye!
Sgt. Dan:
Low self-esteem.
Damn.
Sgt. Dan:
Being insecure.
Sgt. Williams:
Breathe. Breathe, Allen.
Sgt. Dan: They don't know
how to deal with stress
and frustration.
(gunshot)
Sgt. Williams:
You're still going high.
Often children
of domestic violence
handle conflict
with aggression.
Officer:
Open the door!
-Speaker: Fuck out of here.
-Officer: Come out!
Sgt. Dan: Their response
to taking care of a situation
is also violence.
Officer:
Put your hands up!
Speaker:
Fuck you.
So it's just a cycle,
goes in a circle.
Navajo Police. Can you sit up
for me, man?
Sgt. Dan: Lack of
or loss of employment.
Sgt. Foster: All the alcohol's
underneath that bed,
need all that dumped out.
Sgt. Dan:
High risk for substance abuse,
that's their way of coping.
DV is not anger-driven.
It is power and control.
Isolation.
A lot of avenues or ways
of escape for the victim
is just cut off.
Economic dependency.
And so all of the funding
that comes down from Congress,
it goes to the BIA.
Sgt. Dan: They can't do
anything financially
without the perpetrator.
Everything has
to go through them.
Common abuser
characteristics.
Believes they are better
and different than others.
No part of the violence that
they inflict on their victim
is their fault.
Avoids facts.
Will show them a picture
or statements
from victims...
(training officer yells)
Sgt. Dan:
...and they still won't
believe it's their fault.
They will have blood
on their hands,
and they'll say,
"That's not me.
I wouldn't do that."
(flag fluttering)
(somber music playing)
♪♪